Arab travels
1) Bogharib and Josuf on Lualaba/Kasongo's, to up to Legaland, will go ahead
2) Josuf & Moenepembe to Katanga and beyond, info re: Chibungo; Lualaba West = the dividing line between Rua and Lunda or Londa; fountains south of Kantanga
3) Trading party from east with info re epidemic between Ujiji and coast; goes west
4) Syde bin Habib and Dugumbe
5) Path inland to avoid tsetse (XIV)
6) Tipotipo & Syde bin Ali's path to Lunda
7) Rivers crossed by Ramadan & Hassani August and Septr 1870 in Balegga (XIV), reach to one day of Uerere (XVII) 

Gen notes
DL = similar to armchair geographer, reports, synthesizes, theorizes
Extended cultural notes and observations
Speaks from lawless terrain, lack of force = weakness
Weaves layers of time in first gathering
First gathering - general obs: alternates first-hand obs on local practices and social dynamics, with narr of own travels, complaints about Nassickers, narr of obs gathered from others
Second gathering - moves backwards in historical time, v. other explorers, armchair discoverers = broad contextulization, even more recent explorers all stop short of source farther south
Kaleidoscopic shifts in focus, cf I-III and IV
Travels in time, travels in space
Detailed account of how he got to the present, on most recent leg of travels; reads like a letter
Diary of Arab encroachments into interior and effects on local social dynamics; new news comes in via arrival of Arab trading parties - lines of communication in Central Africa
Elaborate review of knowledge sources on Nile River: DL, Arabs, Africans, historical sources, more recent explorers
Stream of consciousness mixes feelings with events (see eg. XI)
Dreams of mobility of Arab traders while describing all impediments to his movements
Explores own desires: find source of Nile; confirm Moses/Kingdom of Tirhaka


------[first gathering]
0001-0006 - discussion of local cannibalism/funeral rites, incl. Legaland
0007-0012 - local social dynamics and high rates of murder, cannibalism, "a horrid state of bloodthirsty callousness" (0010)
0013-0024 - retrospect to June and intended travels, resistance of attendants (Nassickers), don't fear authority of Sultan, moral deterioration, but DL has not choice b/c Thani fears packet of letters, men have DL at mercy
0024-0033 - So DL sets off with Susi, Chuma, Gardener, meets up with M. Bogharib/Josuf coming from Lualaba/Kasongo's, see destruction fo 9 villages, DL turns back after seeing a local murder & feet torn up; "his ivory trade which at present is like gold digging"; DL's make deal with Bogharib to go to Lualabal via Luamo
0033-0040 - DL meditates on recent illnesses and death; Bogharib's people travel N & E/W from Kasongo's to Balegga country, description thereof, customs, animals, geography, "This report makes me thankful I did not go for I should have seen nothing - and been worn out by fatigue & mud," divers rivers
0041-0045 - Info re: along Lualaba/Metamba generally, sheep, geography, local crafts, marketplaces, Barua & items in trade, customs re: war and markets
0045-0055 - behavior of men b/w Mamohela and Bambarre, various plans of men and Bogharib's intercession, "speaking mildly makes them images that the spokesman is afraid fo them"; spoiled by Asylum, men's various schemes to avoid work, behavior (and tolerance thereof) at Asylum
0055-0062 - Cowardice in return to Bambarre; two take slaves themselves; desert DL and do as like; Manyema bold except for guns: "their badness consists in being dreadfully afraid of guns and the Arabs can do just as they like with them and their goods; various instance of African resistance to Arabs, esp 59-62
0063 - Manyema village spatial specs, details of interior of huts, geographical placement, inter-village dynamics; no [outside] previous traders; internal trading dymamics: "Barua brought copper and skins for tusks and the Babira & Baguha coarse beads." Babira enraged at Ujijian arrival

------[second gathering]
I. Josuf/Moenepembe reports of Chibungo, Lualaba West and Lufira as feeders, then mound, then Liambai and Lunga ftns; link to Bible, source of Herodotus/rereading Herodotus, linking geography to Ptolemy; "Patience is all I can exercise – these irritable ulcers hedge me in now as did my attendants in June but all will be for the best for it is in Providence & not in me"
II. Extent of watershed; "theoretical discoverers" bashed; respect for other explorers, must nonetheless show their mistakes; Speke and Grant's foregone conclusion; Baker turns back early.
III. Extols Tinne above others: "I cannot concieve of her stopping short of Lake Bangweolo"; desire of everyone since Ptolemy to know; major contribution of Tinne and Lady Baker; various Egyptian explorations stop short of sources
IV. Behavior of the Soko, shift from flesh to Manyema cannibalism

A18-A19. Hopes for evidence of Moses/Meroe in Ethiopia; Moses's transcendence beyond petty acts; rereading Moses's life in isolation; "If the sacred chronology would thereby be confirmed, I would not grudge the toil & hardships, hunger & pain, I have endured - the irritable ulcers would only be discipline. -"
A19-A21 - impact of Manyema country on health; description of the ulcers, alleviations; other diseases; Arabs help spread them
A21 - What Speke should have done; how DL will rename various rivers & lakes
A21-A22 - Trading party from Ujiji, epidemic between Ujiji and coast; waiting on Habib and Dugumbe; defrauded by Lewale et al; Bogharid's men to go to Metamba again
A22-A23 - What is a theoretical discoverer? Previous mistakes about Chambeze by Portuguese, Cooley, and DL himself; 22 months of wasted time; Chief Cazembe first gives light that all lakes and rivers are part of same system
A23-A24 - Another report of Arab fighting and enumeration of spoils in Legaland

X. In hut: 22 July - 10 October (80 days), fever last 20 days, extent of cure & medicines; waiting on Habib, more oral info north on Lualaba esp re: ivory, petty sources of fighting: "The nine villages and a 100 men killed by Katomba’s slaves at Nasangwa were all about a string of beads fastened to a powder horn which a manyema man tried in vain to steal"
XI. More news from Ujiji trading party (see {21}, Oct 4), speculation re: building at Bagamoio, plans for highlands, longs for news
XII. Mayema hoeing v. Muhamad's rice, metereological details
XII-XIII. State of muddy paths in Manyema
XIII. Disruptions caused by Ujijians, natives friendly to DL, but "undoubtedly bloodthirsty to other Manyema & kill each other"
XIV. Lions' fat protects against tsetse; stations on path inland to avoid tsetse; Tipotipo & Syde bin Ali's course to Lunda; DL to follow Habib and Dugumbe to West Lualaba, thence to Katanga
XIV. Safe way around tsetse recap; Msene to north of Unyanyembe; "Rivers crossed by Ramadan & Hassani August and Septr 1870 in Balegga - "

A29-A30 - Animosity/violence among Manyema villages: "The great want of the Manyema is national life. Of this they have none. Each headman is independent of every other." Anecdoete of death of Moenekuss's oldest son
A30-31 - Discussion of how springs/oracles worked in Greece/East; long quotations from Pusey and Jowett: divisions enabled arrival of saviour (unspoken comparison to African situation?)

XVII - Muhmad's people leave for metamba; Nassickers threaten to accompany but Muhamad prevents; relations with women at Mamohela; refusal to work, lying, etc; stagnation of Manyema v. occasional appearance of superior man; Moenekuss v. narrow sons; origins of Bambarre people which DL calls Manyuema (= forest people); Hassani's party travels to withine one day of Uerere, then hostility of Balegga
XVIII - "In this Journey I have endeavoured to follow with unswerving fidelity the line of duty" "to make a complete work of the exploration of the sources of the Nile", desire to discover evidence of Moses; intended forward journey; Syde bin Habib – Dugumbe – Juma Merikano
Abdullah Masudi coming, will go to West Lualaba; remembers FO letter, Murray, RGS instructions
XIX - Manyema buy wives; local social dynamics plus interference of Arabs; discussion of plain on bank of Lualaba plus canoes & market goers; peace on plain v. violence of forest; DL longs to finish travel/resolve Nile source, find evidence of Moses
XX - Gratitude of from Young's search; Johanna men's heartlessness v Makololo: "From long inter-course with both I take these incidents as typical of the two races. Those of mixed blood possess the vices of both races and the virtues of neither"; Sultan doesn't trust own subjects (Arabs), but gives money to Indians; failings of various non-Western's (Burton's, Speke's Musa, DL's liberated slaves); the black Arab from Cazembe that causes probs for DL