Dr. Livingstone, I presume?
Events in Nyangwe
"I saw three of Dugumbe[']s people with guns in the market place with wonder but thought it ignorance and retired - when 50 yards off two guns were fired and a general flight took place - goods thrown away in terror firing  on the helpless canoes took place = a long line of heads in the wate shewed the numbers that would perish for they could not swim two miles shot after shot followed on the terrified fugitives = great numbers died"
Stanley's memorialization
slavery
“It’s not all pleasure this exploration.”
1. “But the strangest disease I have seen in this country seems really to be broken heartedness" (Livingstone on the effects of slavery)2. “I once saw a party in the slave yoke singing merrily & thought my these fellows have taken to it kindly […] I asked the cause of their mirth & was told that they laughed at the idea "of coming back after death and haunting & killing those who had sold them."
Livingstone in Westminster
-----------------------------------
Blantyre, mills, education
"My reading while at work was carried on by placing the book on a portion of the spinning-jenny, so that I could catch sentence after sentence as I passed at my work; I thus kept up a pretty constant study undisturbed by the roar of the machinery."
first sojourn
cross-continent crossing
Victoria Falls -- "the most wonderful sight I had witnessed in Africa" 
"When about half a mile from the falls, I left the canoe by which we had come down thus far, and embarked in a lighter one, with men well acquainted with the rapids, who, by passing down the centre of the stream in the eddies and still places caused by many jutting rocks, brought me to an island situated in the middle of the river, and on the edge of the lip over which the water rolls. In coming hither there was danger of being swept down by the streams which rushed along on each side of the island; but the river was now low, and we sailed where it is totally impossible to go when the water is high. But, though we had reached the island, and were within a few yards of the spot, a view from which would solve the whole problem, I believe that no one could perceive where the vast body of water went; it seemed to lose itself in the earth, the opposite lip of the fissure into which it disappeared being only 80 feet distant. At least I did not comprehend it until, creeping with awe to the verge, I peered down into a large rent which had been made from bank to bank of the broad Zambesi, and saw that a stream of a thousand yards broad leaped down a hundred feet, and then became suddenly compressed into a space of fifteen or twenty yards."
objectives: CCC, highway, missions
"I view the end of the geographical feat as the beginning of the missionary enterprise."
“I am a missionary, heart and soul. God had an only Son, and He was a missionary and a physician. A poor, poor imitation I am or wish to be. In this service I hope to live, and in it I wish to die.”
-----------------------------------
Failure of second expedition
"I am prepared to go anywhere, provided it be forward."
5. “I pray for help to do what is right but sorely am I perplexed & grieved & mourn – I cannot give up making a complete work of the exploration”6. “I think I am in the line of duty . . . I have never wavered in my conviction that this is the case.”
Today scholarly opinions changes
Massive digitization projects
Role of native populations, controversial view on Arab slave traders
Spectral imaging technology




